Hi, I am Delio Vicini, and I am a 4th year PhD student at EPFL.
In this talk, I will present our paper “Path Replay backpropagation:
Differentiating light paths using constant memory and linear time”.
This is joint work with Sebastien Speierer and Wenzel Jakob.
Rendering algorithms are used to generate realistic images of virtual
scenes. Given the geometry, textures and material descriptions of a
scene, we can generate a very realistic image.
This forward rendering process is well understood.
In this paper, we are concerned with the inverse problem: we seek to
reconstruct scene parameters given an image.
For example, given the geometry, we would like to reconstruct the RGB
textures that reproduce the appearance of the target image.
We can do this by formulating this task as an optimization problem.
We will try to find the textures which minimize a loss between the
rendered image and the reference image.
The loss could for example be the mean squared error.
Recently, gradient-based optimization methods have become popular to
tackle such problems.
The key ingredient for such methods to work is to have a
*differentiable renderer*. Using a differentiable renderer, we can
then minimize the loss by computing the derivative with respect to
the scene parameters and running gradient descent.
Running the optimization, we will eventually end up finding textures
that reproduces the appearance of the reference image.
Of course, differentiable rendering is not just useful for the
problem of optimizing textures.
It has been used for applications such as shape reconstruction,
neural rendering, appearance optimization and many more.
There are a range of widely used tools and methods that either use a
version of rasterization or neural rendering to make the rendering
process differentiable. On the other hand, we have recently seen
physically based differentiable rendering to become more and more
practical. These methods simulate the full light transport in a
differentiable way. In this paper, our goal is to improve the
efficiency of such methods, where we compute gradients of complex
light transport involving global illumination.
Long-term, we expect these two boxes to overlap more and more.
When using physically based differentiable rendering, there are some
challenges. One challenge are visibility discontinuities.
For example, if we want to optimize the position of an object, we
need to compute derivatives of terms related to the silhouette.
This turns out to be challenging problem.
We don’t address this issue in our paper and refer to other recent
papers for reference. The other central problem is the complexity due
to long light paths and the heterogeneous nature of the light
transport simulation. We need to be able to compute derivatives in
the presence of complex lighting effects such as volumetric
scattering. Moreover, we are interested in methods that can compute
the derivatives of millions of parameters simultaneously.
Note that handling complex light transport is mostly orthogonal from
the problem of handling visibility discontinuities.
Let’s define the problem a bit more precisely now.
To render a realistic image of a scene, we can use path tracing.
Path tracing estimates the colors of the image by sampling many light
paths in the scene. Starting at the camera, the light paths scatter
on objects in a scene until they eventually reach a light source.
For a given light path, we can compute its contribution to the final
image. In an RGB renderer, this will simply be a color value.
The question is now how can efficiently compute the derivative of a
light path’s contribution with respect to scene parameters.
For example, what is the derivative with respect to the color of a
texel in this painting on the right.
Additionally, we might also be interested in derivatives with respect
to other parameters encountered along the path.
This makes the problem even more challenging.
One way to compute derivatives of a complex computation, such as path
tracing, is to use automatic differentiation.
For example, let’s say we want to compute the derivatives of an output
variable y with respect to three inputs x_0, x_1 and x_2.
There are two main flavors of automatic differentiation that can be
used to compute such gradients.
The first approach is forward mode automatic differentiation, where
we need to run the computation once for each component of the
gradient vector. For rendering, this would amount to rendering the
scene once per parameter, which quickly becomes infeasible.
The alternative is to use reverse-mode automatic differentiation.
Here, we compute derivatives in two passes.
First, we run the computation while storing certain partial results.
In a backward pass, we then accumulate gradients by propagating the
gradient of the output in reverse order using the stored computation
graph. We can then efficiently accumulate gradients for millions of
parameters. This process is often also just called “backpropagation”
and is what we use to for example train neural networks.
In differentiable rendering, using reverse-mode automatic
differentiation can be understood as storing some amount of
information per bounce of each light path.
This is a simplified view, but it’s sufficient to see that this
quickly requires gigabytes of memory when handling a wavefront of
rays. Using automatic differentiation is conceptually simple and can
be quite fast, but the extreme memory requirements are hard to deal
with. This is the case even when using common optimizations such as
checkpointing. Even a highly optimized implementation will quickly
run out of memory on modern GPUs.
One alternative approach to using conventional AD was presented at
last year’s SIGGRAPH in the form of radiative backpropagation.
In that paper, the authors suggest to replace conventional AD by
tracing light paths to estimate derivatives.
Compared to using automatic differentiation, we now don’t need to
store information for each light bounce anymore.
In radiative backpropagation, we compute gradients by tracing light
paths from the camera. Once we hit a surface, we trace a recursive
light path to estimate the incident indirect illumination.
This is then used to compute scene parameter derivatives.
We then continue tracing in the scene to estimate derivatives of other
scene parameters. This method solves the problem of the memory
consumption, but at the price of quadratic complexity in the number
of light bounces. This can quickly become prohibitive.
The authors therefore suggest avoiding the recursive estimation of the
incident primal radiance.
As an approximation, one can assume the incident radiance to simply be
equal to 1. That reduces the complexity to linear in the number of
bounces but introduces bias in the estimated parameter gradients.
It turns out that this bias can hurt optimization performance
significantly. We will get back to that later.
In our work, we propose a new method that produces unbiased derivative
estimates in linear time and using a constant amount of memory.
We show that our method generalizes to perfectly specular surfaces,
which cannot be handled by radiative backpropagation.
Lastly, our method for the first time allows to use delta tracking
for differentiable volume rendering.
To give the high-level idea of our method let’s revisit the example
scene from before. When we trace a light path, we essentially compute
the sample value as a product of the local surface albedos and the
light source intensity. Given such a product, how could we compute
its derivative with respect to one of the terms?
In the following I will present a heavily simplified “baby version”
of our method to explain the intuition behind it.
It turns out that this derivative has a very simple form.
If we take the derivative, we are left with the terms before the
current light bounce and the terms after it.
The prefix is exactly the throughput of the light path until the
current bounce and the suffix is the incident indirect illumination.
We can then simply compute the derivative as the final sample radiance
divided by the value at the bounce of interest.
So somewhat surprisingly, the derivative became a simple ratio.
We can do the same computation for other terms in the product.
This indicates that all we need to know is the sample radiance!
This again is a simplified view on the problem, but this is really at
the core the intuition behind our method.
Our method computes gradients in two steps
First, we compute the sample value L using regular path tracing.
Second, we then *replay* the same light path by using the same random
seed as before. While we trace this light path, we can then
accumulate the local parameter derivatives by reusing the result of
the first pass. Our method uses a constant amount of memory, has
linear complexity and computes unbiased gradient estimates.
In practice, the method is more complex than explained here.
We need to handle arbitrary BSDF parameters, and not just albedo
textures. We also need to deal with emissive surfaces and next event
estimation. Our method accounts for all of this, but these things are
a bit too technical for this talk.
I will refer you to the paper for details and pseudocode.
I would like to provide some more insight on the mathematical idea
that is underlying our method.
We can think of path tracing as simply running a for loop over a
number of N bounces.
In each loop iteration, we update some loop state to construct a light
path and accumulate radiance.
In a more abstract sense, our path tracer starts from some initial
state and updates this state until eventually terminating.
If we now want to differentiate such a computation using AD, we can
simply store the loop state after each iteration.
The stored state can then be used to backpropagate gradients from the
output of the algorithm. There is an interesting symmetry here.
To compute derivatives at state “k” we need two things.
First, we need the state after k iterations computed in the forward
direction. Conventional AD simply stores this information during the
forward pass. The second one is a bit more subtle: the backward pass
computes the product of Jacobians between iterations.
This product is accumulated from state N all the way down to state k
in reverse order. Both these quantities are needed to accumulate
parameter gradients. Besides just storing all iteration states, we
could also try to exploit reversibility of individual iteration
steps. To do so, we first run the forward pass without storing any
intermediate state. The gradients are then computed by reconstructing
the states by applying the inverse loop iteration from the output of
the computation. This idea underlies the adjoint sensitivity method
for differential equations.
It has also been used in some neural network papers.
However, applying this to rendering seems difficult: one would need
to be able to reconstruct a light path in the reverse direction.
Our method therefore solves the problem in a different way.
Instead of trying to reconstruct the state “k”, we reconstruct the
Jacobian product. During the forward pass, we build the Jacobian
product over all loop iterations.
We then run the adjoint pass in the same direction as the original
forward pass and apply the inverse of the local Jacobian matrix to
reconstruct the currently needed Jacobian product.
The structure of the path tracer makes it such that this can be done
efficiently. If we don’t care about specular surfaces, this does not
even require the use of any matrix inverses.
Our method allows to run the adjoint pass by simply replaying the
light path, without having to explicitly invert computation.
In the paper we also present a way to gracefully handle the Jacobian
inversion in the presence of singularities.
As far as we know, this approach to computing derivatives is new and
could potentially be useful in other domains too.
Before looking at results, I would like to briefly discuss two more
applications of our method.
One interesting use case are specular surfaces.
Let’s say we add a glass object on this table in the room.
For forward rendering, nothing really changes, we just trace light
paths as usual However, if we are now interested in gradients with
respect to the shape of that object, we need to be more careful.
Suppose that this scene includes a differentiable parameter that
controls the scale of this glass object.
Scaling the object causes the light will refract slightly differently.
This means that changing this scene parameter can change the whole
light path. We need to account for this when trying to estimate
derivatives. It turns out that our method can be adapted to this
case. We can do that be extending the first pass to not only return
the contribution of the light path, but also it’s derivative with
respect to the camera ray.
This 3 by 4 Jacobian matrix contains the derivative of each color
channel with respect to the geometry of the ray.
In the second pass, we can then use that derivative to compute scene
parameter gradients. In each iteration of the second pass, we compute
the derivative of the incident radiance with respect to the current
ray. This involves inverting a 4 by 4 matrix in each iteration to
reconstruct these derivatives.
Please see the paper for pseudocode and details on this.
Another important application of our method is unbiased volume
rendering. Volume rendering is a tough case for differentiable
rendering, because volumes often need to be rendered with a very high
number of bounces. When rendering volumes, we need to alternate
between sampling the distance to the next scattering event and the
direction. In a heterogeneous medium, we need to use delta tracking
to sample the free-flight distance in an unbiased way.
Delta tracking works by sampling tentative “null” interactions until
eventually a real interaction is sampled.
By sampling null and real interactions with the right probabilities
we can sample the free-flight distance in an unbiased way.
Using delta tracking makes volume rendering even more difficult to
differentiate due to the high number of interactions.
This also has the consequence that light paths terminate after vastly
different numbers of real or null interactions have been computed.
This makes it completely infeasible to use conventional automatic
differentiation, which needs to render the image by computing large
wavefronts of rays in parallel.
Our method now for the first time enables efficient differentiation
of renderings using delta tracking.
On top of applying our path replay backpropagation itself this
requires careful treatment of the discrete sampling steps in delta
tracking. I refer to the paper for an expanded derivation and
pseudocode. Now let’s have a look at some results.
In this figure, we compare the parameter gradients computed using
radiative backpropagation, our method and conventional AD.
For each of these scenes, we compute the gradients of one of the
textures. In the first scene, we show the gradient of the floor’s
diffuse texture. In the second scene, we show the gradient of the
roughness texture of the dragon
and in the third scene we computed the gradient of the normal map.
Both our method and radiative backpropagation can reproduce the
gradients produced by AD The biased version of radiative
backpropagation produces gradients with wrong magnitude and even
wrong signs. We can also compare our method to the biased version of
radiative backpropagation on an actual optimization problem.
Here we optimize the scalar roughness of the metal surface of the
bunny. Our method and conventional AD converge to the same result,
whereas biased radiative backpropagation fails to converge.
To better understand the convergence behavior of these methods, we
visualize the gradient of the image loss with respect to the
roughness parameter in the previous scene.
Since this is a scalar parameter, we can plot the gradient over all
possible combinations of current and target values.
On the horizontal axis, we vary the target roughness.
On the vertical axis, we vary the current roughness.
Going from left to right in this plot, the target image of the
optimization changes.
In this plot, we expect the negative of the gradient to point towards
the diagonal, where current and target roughness are matching.
We can see in this plot that this optimization problem is unimodal
and therefore quite easy to solve.
Our method computes gradients that match the reference.
However, the biased version of radiative backpropagation has wrong
gradient signs and won’t be able to converge to the solution for most
combinations of initial and target roughness.
We can also use our method to optimize volume densities using delta
tracking. Here, we optimize the volume using 3 different viewpoints.
Here, both conventional AD and standard radiative backpropagation fail
to converge, as they can’t handle the complexity of delta tracking.
The biased RB and our method both converge, but the biased RB again
has some convergence issues due to bias.
We can also run more complex optimizations.
In this scene, we optimize the normal map and roughness of the metal
fish. We also optimize a scattering volume’s density and albedo to
approximate the plant on the right.
Starting at a low resolution, we gradually optimize all parameters
simultaneously. Comparing our method to biased radiative
backpropagation, we can see that our method converges better for all
involved parameters. The biased version of radiative backpropagation
fails to optimize the normal map and shows some artifacts on the
volume. Both conventional automatic differentiation and the unbiased
version of radiative backpropagation are again unable to optimize
this scene. Another interesting use case are computing derivatives of
objects exhibiting subsurface scattering.
Subsurface scattering is interesting, because it requires us to render
a high number of light bounces to faithfully reproduce the appearance
of an object. On the right we see that if we reduce the number of
considered bounces, there is significant energy loss.
We compare the performance of our method to prior methods.
Conventional AD quickly runs out of memory as we increase the number
of bounces. On the other hand, the quadratic complexity of radiative
backpropagation results in long computation times.
Our method both uses a constant amount of memory and remains
computationally efficient even for a high number of bounces.
As a last example, I would like to show an application of our
derivatives of specular surfaces.
In this scene, we optimize the normal map of a refractive glass slab
to reconstruct the appearance of the reference on the left.
In conclusion, path replay backpropagation is a powerful new approach
to limit memory and computation overheads during unbiased
differentiable rendering. This method can be generalized to specular
surfaces and for the first time allows to efficiently differentiate
through delta tracking. For future work, it would be interesting to
apply our method to additional light transport phenomena such as
polarized light or stochastic layered materials.
Finally, it would also be interesting apply our method to other
domains and problems outside of light transport.
This concludes this presentation, thank you for your attention.